# Distributed Transactions

## Background
Problem:
- lots of data records, sharded on multiple servers, lots of clients


Correct behavior of a xactions: ACID
- A: Atomicity, all writes or none, despite failures
- C: obeys application-specific invariants
- I: Isolation, no interference between xactions -- serializable
- D: Durability, committed writes are permanent


How to test whether the xactions is serializability:
- example transactions
```
  x and y are bank balances -- records in database tables
  x and y are on different servers (maybe at different banks)
  x and y start out as $10
  T1 and T2 are transactions
    T1: transfer $1 from x to y
    T2: audit, to check that no money is lost
  T1:             T2:
  begin_xaction   begin_xaction
    add(x, 1)       tmp1 = get(x)
    add(y, -1)      tmp2 = get(y)
  end_xaction       print tmp1, tmp2
                  end_xaction
```
- execute concurrent transactions T1 and T2
```
T1; T2 : x=11 y=9 "11,9"
T2; T1 : x=11 y=9 "10,10"
the results for the two differ; either is OK
```                 

## Concurrency Control
Distributed transactions have two big components:
- concurrency control (to provide isolation/serializability)
- atomic commit (to provide atomicity despite failure)

Two classes of concurrency control for transactions:
- pessimistic:
  + lock records before use
  + conflicts cause delays (waiting for locks)
- optimistic:
  + use records without locking
  + commit checks if reads/writes were serializable
  + conflict causes abort+retry
  + called Optimistic Concurrency Control (OCC)
- pessimistic is faster if conflicts are frequent
- optimistic is faster if conflicts are rare

"Two-phase locking" is pessimistic:
- a transaction must acquire a record's lock before using it
- a transaction must hold its locks until *after* commit or abort

Process:
```
TC             A           B
|----put------>|(lock data)
|-----------get---------->|(lock data)
|
|
|---prepare--->|
|----------prepare-------->|
|
|<---yes/no----|
|<-----------yes/no--------|
|
|
|-commit/abort->|(commit/abort and release lock)
|---------commit/abort---->|(commit/abort and release lock)
|<----ack-----|
|<-------------ack---------|
```

Failure tolerance:
- What if B crashes and restarts?
  + If B sent YES before crash, B must remember (despite crash)! Because A might have received a COMMIT and committed. So B must be able to commit (or not) even after a reboot.
    * write log to disk
- What if TC crashes and restarts?
  + If TC might have sent COMMIT before crash, TC must remember! Since one worker may already have committed.
    * write log to disk before sending COMMIT msgs.
    * repeat COMMIT if it crashes and reboots, or if a participants asks.
- What if TC never gets a YES/NO from B?
  + Perhaps B crashed and didn't recover; perhaps network is broken.
    * TC can time out, and abort (since has not sent any COMMIT msgs).
- What if B times out or crashes while waiting for PREPARE from TC?
  + B has not yet responded to PREPARE, so TC can't have decided commit
    * B can unilaterally abort, and release locks
    * respond NO to future PREPARE
- What if B replied YES to PREPARE, but doesn't receive COMMIT or ABORT?
  + B cannot decide to abort it, because TC might have gotten YES from both, and sent out COMMIT to A, but crashed before sending to B.
    * cannot do anything, just wait for TC came back


Two-phase commit perspective:
+ Used in sharded DBs when a transaction uses data on multiple shards
+ slow: multiple rounds of messages
+ slow: disk writes
+ locks are held over the prepare/commit exchanges; blocks other xactions
+ TC crash can cause indefinite blocking, with locks held


## Consolidate with Raft  

Difference between Raft:
+ Use Raft to get high availability by replicating, Raft does not ensure that all servers do something. Only a majority have to be alive.
+ Use 2PC when each participant does something different, 2PC does not help availability

Consolidate with Raft, achieve both high availability *and* atomic commit:
- The TC and servers should each be replicated with Raft
- It is the basic theory of Spanner

## Reference
- [Principles of Computer System Design, Chapter 9](https://ocw.mit.edu/resources/res-6-004-principles-of-computer-system-design-an-introduction-spring-2009/online-textbook/)
- [mit-course-note: distributed transactions](https://pdos.csail.mit.edu/6.824/notes/l-2pc.txt)
