# 5.Golang and thread


## Go Memory model of Synchronization

### Initialization

Program initialization runs in a single goroutine, but that goroutine may create other goroutines, which run concurrently.

If a package p imports package q, the completion of q's `init` functions happens **before** the start of any of p's.

The start of the function `main.main` happens **after** all `init` functions have finished.


### Goroutine creation

through go statement, `go func()`, then goroutine's execution begins.
```golang
var a string

func f() {
	print(a)
}

func hello() {
	a = "hello, world"
	go f()
}
```


### Goroutine destruction

The exit of a goroutine is not guaranteed to happen before any event in the program. For example, in this program:
```golang
var a string

func hello() {
	go func() { a = "hello" }()
	print(a)
}
```

the assignment to `a` can happens before Goroutine exit or not.


### Channel Communication
A send on a channel happens before the corresponding receive from that channel completes. It is the main method to guaranteen the order.

Example1: Buffered channel
```golang
var c = make(chan int, 10)
var a string

func f() {
	a = "hello, world"
	c <- 0 // or close(c)
}

func main() {
	go f()
	<-c
	print(a)
}
```
It can helps to guaranteen assignment of `a` happends before `print(a)`.



Example2: Unbuffered channel
```golang
var c = make(chan int)
var a string

func f() {
	a = "hello, world"
	<-c
}
```

```golang
func main() {
	go f()
	c <- 0
	print(a)
}
```

The difference between buffered channel is that `func f()` will only exit after value in channel is received.

A receive from an unbuffered channel happens before the send on that channel completes.

The implementation theory of buffer capacity is that sending an item acquires the **semaphore**, and receiving an item releases the semaphore. This is a common idiom for limiting concurrency.

### Lock

The `sync` package implements two lock data types, lock `sync.Mutex` and read-write lock `sync.RWMutex`.


### Once
Multiple threads can execute `once.Do(f)` for a particular f, but only **one will run** `f()`, and the other calls **block** until f() has returned.

```golang
var a string
var once sync.Once

func setup() {
	a = "hello, world"
}

func doprint() {
	once.Do(setup)
	print(a)
}

func twoprint() {
	go doprint()
	go doprint()
}
```

calling twoprint will call `setup` **exactly once**. The setup function will complete before either call of print. The result will be that "hello, world" will be *printed twice*.



## Reference
- [mit-course-note: Go, Threads, and Raft](https://pdos.csail.mit.edu/6.824/notes/l-go-concurrency.txt)
- [Go tutorial](https://tour.golang.org/welcome/1)
- [Go memory model](https://golang.org/ref/mem)
